# Working with Grid5000 

This tutorial shows you how to provision machines, install applications and conduct experiments on the reserved machines on [Grid5000](https://www.grid5000.fr/w/Grid5000:Home).

If you do not have a Grid5000 account, check out the [Grid5000:Get an account](https://www.grid5000.fr/w/Grid5000:Get_an_account)

## Setup to access nodes from outside Grid5000
If you want to run `cloudal` to interact with Grid5000 system from your laptop (not on a Grid5000 frontend), you have to perform the following steps on your laptop.

1. Setup an alias for the access to any hosts inside Grid5000. 

In `~/.ssh/config`, put these lines:
```
Host g5k
  User <your_g5k_username>
  Hostname access.grid5000.fr
  ForwardAgent no

Host *.g5k
  User <your_g5k_username>
  ProxyCommand ssh g5k -W "$(basename %h .g5k):%p"
  ForwardAgent no
```


2. Setup `~/.execo.conf.py` configuration file 

```
import re
  
default_connection_params = {
    'host_rewrite_func': lambda host: re.sub("\.grid5000\.fr$", ".g5k", host),
    'taktuk_gateway': 'g5k'
    }


default_frontend_connection_params = {
    'user': '<your_g5k_username>',
    'host_rewrite_func': lambda host: host + ".g5k"
    }

g5k_configuration = {
    'api_username': '<your_g5k_username>',
    }

```

These above configurations follow the instruction of: 

- [Running from outside Grid5000](http://execo.gforge.inria.fr/doc/latest-stable/execo_g5k.html#running-from-outside-grid5000)

- [Using SSH ProxyCommand to access hosts inside Grid5000](https://www.grid5000.fr/w/SSH#Using_SSH_ProxyCommand_feature_to_ease_the_access_to_hosts_inside_Grid.275000)

## Example 1: Provision nodes on Grid5000
In this example, we provision some nodes on Grid5000 system.

First, edit the provision config file `provisioning_config_g5k.yaml` with your desired infrastructure description.

Then, run the following command to make the provisioning:
```
cd cloudal/examples/provision/
python provision_g5k.py --system_config_file provisioning_config_g5k.yaml -k
```

The `provision_g5k.py` script makes a reservation with the description in the provision config file `provisioning_config_g5k.yaml`: 10 nodes on *econome*, 3 nodes on *dahu* and 7 nodes on *graphite* clusters in 3 hours. These nodes are deployed with the `debian10-x64-big` environment. You can see all the supported OS enviroments from Grid5000 [here](https://www.grid5000.fr/w/Getting_Started#Deploying_nodes_with_Kadeploy). The nodes are kept alive after this script is terminated (with `-k` option) so that you can connect to them.

## Example 2: Configure Docker on running Grid5000 nodes
In this example, we provision some nodes on Grid5000 and then install Docker and configure to ensure that Docker runs on these nodes.

First, we also need to edit the provision config file `provisioning_config_g5k.yaml` with your own requirements.

Then, run the following command to provision and configure nodes:
```
cd cloudal/examples/configuration/
python config_docker_env_g5k.py --system_config_file provisioning_config_g5k.yaml -k
```

This `config_docker_env_g5k.py` script makes a reservation for nodes then installs Docker on them.

You can modify the `config_host()` function in the script to install and configure your necessary applications.

## Example 3: Configure AntidoteDB on running Grid5000 nodes

This example is similar to the example 2, but after provisioning some nodes on Grid5000, it installs AntidoteDB and configure to ensure that AntidoteDB runs on these nodes.

You also have to describe your infrastructure in  `provisioning_config_g5k.yaml` file.

Then, run the following command:
```
cd cloudal/examples/configuration/
python config_antidotedb_env_g5k.py --system_config_file provisioning_config_g5k.yaml -k
```

This `config_antidotedb_env_g5k.py` script makes a reservation for nodes then installs Docker on them, next pulls AntidoteDB docker image, and then runs AntidoteDB container.

You can modify the `config_host()` function in the script to install and configure your necessary applications.


## Example 4: Perform an experiment: measuring Docker boot time on configured Grid5000 nodes
In this example, we provision some nodes on Grid5000 and then install Docker on these nodes.

First, edit the provision config file `provisioning_config_g5k.yaml` and the experimental setting file `exp_setting_docker_boottime.yaml` depends on your experiment setup.

Then, run the following command to perform experiment:
```
cd cloudal/examples/experiments/boottime/docker/
python docker_boottime_g5k.py --system_config_file provisioning_config_g5k.yaml --exp_setting_file exp_setting_docker_boottime.yaml -c /path/to/your/result/dir -k
```

The `docker_boottime_g5k.py` script (i) makes a reservation for nodes; then (ii) installs Docker on them and (iii) measures Docker boot time with different scenarios and saves all the results in the indicated result directory.

You can modify the `_perform_experiments()` function in the script to design your own experiment workflow scenarios.